Blog post for Android February release (#21589)
home-assistant/home-assistant.github.io: source/_posts/2022-02-08-android-february.markdown

---
title: "Android 2022.2: Local Push Notifications!"
description: "Local Push Notifications, In-App Changelog and more!"
date: 2022-02-09 00:00:00
date_formatted: "February 11, 2022"
comments: true
author: Daniel Shokouhi
categories: Release-Notes
og_image: /images/blog/2022-02-android/Companion.png
---

![Screenshot of Companion](/images/blog/2022-02-android/Companion.png)

> Hey Everyone! Its time for the next Android release and we are really excited to get this one out. Lots of chagnes for all versions of the app, including Wear OS and Quest devices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Hey Everyone! Its time for the next Android release and we are really excited to get this one out. Lots of changes for all versions of the app, including Wear OS and Quest devices.
```

## Breaking Changes

We have a pretty big release this month with a lot of changes going on. Some of these changes are noticeable as soon as you update the app, so lets cover those first.

### Local Push Notifications

> The first major change that we want to cover is for [Local Push Notifications]. Before this release if you wanted to get notifications from the app you had to have Google Services on your device as notifications used [Firebase]. Now notifications can be delivered directly from your Home Assistant server, given that you have remote access setup. These notifications do not count towards the rate limit and are shown on the device immediately, everytime. So why the breaking change? The app needs to establish and maintain a constant connection to your Home Assistant server with WebSockets. In order to do this, we have to create a persistent notification and this can be upsetting to some users.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The first major change that we want to cover is for [Local Push Notifications]. Before this release all notifications were routed via Google. Now notifications can be delivered directly from your Home Assistant server if you have remote access setup. These notifications do not count towards the rate limit and are shown on the device immediately, everytime.

So what's the breaking change? The app needs to establish and maintain a constant connection to your Home Assistant server with WebSockets. In order to do this, we have to create a persistent notification and this can be upsetting to some users.
```

> Why the persistent notification? It is to let Android know the app has important ongoing tasks where we do not want the background process stopped. In order for the app and its services to continue working in the background, we need to create the notification. The purpose of this notification is identical to our Sensor Worker, that allows the app to continue sending sensor updates while in the background. Just like Sensor Worker, our WebSockets notification also has its own notification channel to allow you to customize the appearance. You are free to minimize (or silence) this notification to hide the icon from appearing in your status bar. Some users may also decide to turn off the channel. While there is nothing preventing you from turning it off, if you run into connection issues you will be asked to turn the channel back on.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
A persistent notification lets Android know the app has important ongoing tasks where we do not want the background process stopped. The purpose of this notification is identical to our Sensor Worker, that allows the app to continue sending sensor updates while in the background. Just like Sensor Worker, our WebSockets notification also has its own notification channel to allow you to customize the appearance. You are free to minimize (or silence) this notification to hide the icon from appearing in your status bar.

Some users may also decide to turn off the channel. While there is nothing preventing you from turning it off, if you run into connection issues you will be asked to turn the channel back on.
```

We have seen varying reports from users who either do not notice much of a change in terms of battery usage while others have noticed a big difference. Please feel free to adjust the settings based on your usage and desire for the feature. Some of us developers have opted to keep the option set to "Always" and do not notice much of a change in battery usage. Personally I keep mine on "Always" and I have not had to change my daily charging habits to enjoy this feature, your experience may be different.

A big thank you to [JBassett] for kicking off this feature and working hard to solve all the reported beta issues! Thank you to [jpelgrom], [SkechyWolf] and [dshokouhi] for helping out in finalizing the user experience.

### Sensor Changes

The remaining breaking changes in this release are related to 2 sensors offered by all versions of the app.

> *  [Do Not Disturb Sensor] - This sensor, which was previously offered to all supported Android versions, has been updated to use the official Android API as opposed to the undocumented method being done. The Android API is only available on devices running Android 6+ so if you are not on any supported versions you will no longer see this sensor in the Manage Sensors screen.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*  [Do Not Disturb Sensor] - No longer available on devices running Android 5 or lower. This sensor, which was previously offered to all supported Android versions, has been updated to use the official Android API instead of the undocumented one. The Android API is only available on devices running Android 6+. Older devices will no longer see this sensor in the Manage Sensors screen.
```

> *  [Last Used App Sensor] - This sensor previously reported its state as the application label however, it is not always unique. You may have multiple apps with the exact same label. In order to make this as unique as possible the state will now report the package name as that is guaranteed to be unique from app to app. The old state will be reported as an attribute of the sensor.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
*  [Last Used App Sensor] - This sensor previously reported its state as the application label. We realized that this is not always unique, multiple apps can have the exact same name. The state has changed to report the package id which is guaranteed to be unique. The application name is now available as an attribute.
```

---

> title: "Android 2022.2: Local Push Notifications!"

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: "Android Companion 2022.2: Local Push Notifications!"
```

description: "Local Push Notifications, In-App Changelog and more!"
date: 2022-02-09 00:00:00
date_formatted: "February 11, 2022"
comments: true
author: Daniel Shokouhi
categories: Release-Notes
og_image: /images/blog/2022-02-android/Companion.png
---

![Screenshot of Companion](/images/blog/2022-02-android/Companion.png)

> Hey Everyone! Its time for the next Android release and we are really excited to get this one out. Lots of changes for all versions of the app, including Wear OS and Quest devices.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Hey Everyone! It's time for the next Android release and we are really excited to get this one out. Lots of changes for all versions of the app, including Wear OS and Quest devices.
```

## Breaking Changes

> We have a pretty big release this month with a lot of changes going on. Some of these changes are noticeable as soon as you update the app, so lets cover those first.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We have a pretty big release this month with a lot of changes going on. Some of these changes are noticeable as soon as you update the app, so let's cover those first.
```

### Local Push Notifications

> The first major change that we want to cover is for [Local Push Notifications]. Before this release all notifications were routed via Google. Now notifications can be delivered directly from your Home Assistant server if you have remote access setup. These notifications do not count towards the rate limit and are shown on the device immediately, everytime.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The first major change that we want to cover is for [Local Push Notifications]. Before this release, all notifications were routed via Google. Now notifications can be delivered directly from your Home Assistant server if you have remote access set up. These notifications do not count towards the rate limit and are shown on the device immediately, every time.
```

So what's the breaking change? The app needs to establish and maintain a constant connection to your Home Assistant server with WebSockets. In order to do this, we have to create a persistent notification and this can be upsetting to some users.

> A persistent notification lets Android know the app has important ongoing tasks where we do not want the background process stopped. The purpose of this notification is identical to our Sensor Worker, that allows the app to continue sending sensor updates while in the background. Just like Sensor Worker, our WebSockets notification also has its own notification channel to allow you to customize the appearance. You are free to minimize (or silence) this notification to hide the icon from appearing in your status bar.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A persistent notification lets Android know the app has important ongoing tasks where we do not want the background process stopped. The purpose of this notification is identical to our Sensor Worker, which allows the app to continue sending sensor updates while in the background. Just like Sensor Worker, our WebSockets notification also has its own notification channel to allow you to customize the appearance. You are free to minimize (or silence) this notification to hide the icon from appearing in your status bar.
```

> Some users may also decide to turn off the channel. While there is nothing preventing you from turning it off, if you run into connection issues you will be asked to turn the channel back on.

Reviewer 3: Always write towards the reader, which is a single person. Not a group of people.

```suggestion
You may also decide to turn off the channel. While there is nothing preventing you from turning it off, if you run into connection issues you will be asked to turn the channel back on.
```

![Screenshot of websocket settings](/images/blog/2022-02-android/websocket_setting.png)

The persistent notification will contain an actionable button taking you directly to the settings page. From here you can adjust the WebSocket connection behavior and modify the notification channel. The persistent notification will only be present when an active connection to your server is being maintained.

> Users who are on the [minimal version] of the app will have the default WebSocket connection set to "Always" as this is the only way the app can receive notifications from your server. All other users will have the default setting "While Screen On", where the app will continue to receive notifications from Firebase when the WebSocket connection is not active. If you are on the minimal version you will need to be on Home Assistant Core 2022.2 or later in order to use this feature.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you are on the [minimal version] of the app will have the default WebSocket connection set to "Always" as this is the only way the app can receive notifications from your server. If not, you will have the default setting "While Screen On", where the app will continue to receive notifications from Firebase when the WebSocket connection is not active. If you are on the minimal version you will need to be on Home Assistant Core 2022.2 or later in order to use this feature.
```

> We have seen varying reports from users who either do not notice much of a change in terms of battery usage while others have noticed a big difference. Please feel free to adjust the settings based on your usage and desire for the feature. Some of us developers have opted to keep the option set to "Always" and do not notice much of a change in battery usage. Personally I keep mine on "Always" and I have not had to change my daily charging habits to enjoy this feature, your experience may be different.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We have seen varying reports from users who either do not notice much of a change in terms of battery usage while others have noticed a big difference. Please feel free to adjust the settings based on your usage and desire for the feature. Some of us developers have opted to keep the option set to "Always" and do not notice much of a change in battery usage. Personally, I keep mine on "Always" and I have not had to change my daily charging habits to enjoy this feature, your experience may be different.
```

Hey Everyone! It's time for the next Android release and we are really excited to get this one out. Lots of changes for all versions of the app, including Wear OS and Quest devices.

## Hello Amazon App Store

This month we are saying hello to the Amazon App Store by releasing the [minimal version] of the app. As Amazon devices run Android, some of you probably already have the app installed. Typically you would install another app store in order to get updates as opposed to sideloading. Now, you no longer need to install another app store to get updates.

> Microsoft has also recently [announced] that Windows 11 will support android apps. Microsoft has linked up with Amazon to allow for easy installation for apps found on the Amazon App Store. Once the official update rolls out to Windows 11 devices you will be able to have the android app installed!

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Microsoft has also recently [announced] that Windows 11 will support Android apps. Microsoft has linked up with Amazon to allow for easy installation for apps found on the Amazon App Store. Once the official update rolls out to Windows 11 devices you will be able to have the Android app installed!
```
